README.md, before:

# WG1-P1
The official code repository of SEISMIC working group 1, project 1.

## Organization
Our goal is to use the **analysis** and **tools** folders to share code among collaborators from different institutions. As such, the code should adhere to the common data model that is currently housed elsewhere (see the Wiki). Analysis scripts are meant to be specific to tasks for the project, while the tools will hopefully be broadly useful to others outside the project.
Most users will find what they need in the analysis folder. 

Collaborators that want to can form their own institution-specific folders with material to be shared among their local colleagues, or perhaps results. 

## Tool To-Dos
- Code to map ACT to SAT and the reverse. Tables exist in an SAT/ACT subfolder that are a start.
- Convert networks scripts to common data model
- Convert course vectors scripts to common data model

## Examples

### Create a unified grade/grade anomaly for all top 10 STEM (27-July-2020).
```
analysis/create_all_stem_layer.R:
PURPOSE: This runs as a wrapper, calling grade_penalty_wg1_p1.R as the engine.

NOTES: The Data Model has been updated to include a flag "is_stem", 
to indicate that a course is considered STEM by the user at
their institution. Be sure you've sourced grade_penalty_wg1_p1.R and grade_penalty_functions.R,
both of which live in the analysis folder (see DEPENDENCIES below).

INPUTS:
see https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1SzU4PcIEUsAGnKKyAcugHO2O2aZW29sf9a_cC-FAElk/edit#gid=1679989021
sr, sc: the student course and student record tables
crse_termcd_limit: The lower limit for TERM_CD of the cohort to include. 
                   It includes this term and all those after.
top10: set this to true to let the code try to identify and run on your top 10 courses by 
       enrollment of these students. WARNING: for reasons unknown the
       join required is super slow. 
       
OUTPUTS: Because it makes direct use of grade_penalty_wg1_p1.R below, outputs are exactly the same and 
         and can be written locally (write_tsv or write_csv) and shared.
         
DEPENDENCIES: Must have tidyverse installed, must source the following:
              > source(str_c(<PATH_TO_YOUR_CODE>,'/grade_penalty_functions.R'))
              > source(str_c(<PATH_TO_YOUR_CODE>,'/grade_penalty_wg1_p1.R'))
EXAMPLE: 
> kk <- create_all_stem_layer(sr,sc)
> print(kk[[1]])
> print(kk[[2]])
> print(kk[[3]])
       
```

### Grade Outcomes for a single course
### Run the Grade Penalties Script (19-Apr-2020)
```
analysis/grade_penalty_wg1_p1.R
PURPOSE: Consider one course at a time, one term. This returns various demographic
         breakdowns and returns plots that show differences in outcomes for single
         demographic variables: ethnicity, gender, lowinc, and first gen.
INPUT: see https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1SzU4PcIEUsAGnKKyAcugHO2O2aZW29sf9a_cC-FAElk/edit#gid=1679989021
       sc - table of COURSE LEVEL VARIABLES 
       sr - table of STUDENT LEVEL VARIABLES 
       COURSE - the crs_name for the course to be studied
       TERM   - the crs_term for the course
       aggregate_terms - set to TRUE if you want to disregard term and aggregate over all.
OUTPUT: 1) This prints four plots the plot device (usually the plot view in RStudio)
        2) This returns a list, a variable containing 3 tables
        element 1: demographic statistics for the course by ethnicity, gender, LI, FG.
        element 2: grade penalty statistics by the Molinaro classification
        element 3: grade penalty statistics by the Fiorini classification
DEPENDENCIES: Must have tidyverse installed, must source the 'grade_penalty_functions.R'
              > source(str_c(<PATH_TO_YOUR_CODE>,'/grade_penalty_functions.R'))

EXAMPLE:
> kk <- grade_penalty_wg1_p1(sr,sc,COURSE='PHYSICS 140',TERM='FA 2012')
> print(kk[[1]])
> print(kk[[2]])
> print(kk[[3]])
```

Commit message:

Added description of data release in README.

README.md, after:

# WG1-P1
The official code repository of SEISMIC working group 1, project 1.

## Organization
Our goal is to use the **analysis** and **tools** folders to share code among collaborators from different institutions. As such, the code should adhere to the common data model that is currently housed elsewhere (see the Wiki). Analysis scripts are meant to be specific to tasks for the project, while the tools will hopefully be broadly useful to others outside the project.
Most users will find what they need in the analysis folder. 

Collaborators that want to can form their own institution-specific folders with material to be shared among their local colleagues, or perhaps results. 

## Tool To-Dos
- Code to map ACT to SAT and the reverse. Tables exist in an SAT/ACT subfolder that are a start.
- Convert networks scripts to common data model
- Convert course vectors scripts to common data model

## Examples

### Run the data release code (version 1, 27-March-2021)
In this first version, the code takes your full student course and student record tables, including whatever courses and students happen to be in it, sorts them by total number of students enrolled in them over the entire data set, and then computes a range of Ns, grades, grade anomalies, and DFW rates for different demographic groups and their intersections. The top-level function is here:
```
analysis/run_all_courses_data_release.R
```
Read in the two tables according to data model.
Then compile the dependencies and run the code as follows (see the header of the file for more details):
 ```
 > source(str_c(<PATH_TO_YOUR_CODE>,'analysis/grade_penalty_functions.R'))
 > source(str_c(<PATH_TO_YOUR_CODE>,'analysis/grade_penalty_wg1_p1.R'))
 > tab <- run_all_courses_data_release(sr,sc)
 > write_tsv(tab,'~/Desktop/top250_courses.tab')
```
After writing this out, check that you're happy with any masking/privacy filtering that needs to be done.
If it's good, then upload when you're ready.

### Create a unified grade/grade anomaly for all top 10 STEM (27-July-2020).
```
analysis/create_all_stem_layer.R:
PURPOSE: This runs as a wrapper, calling grade_penalty_wg1_p1.R as the engine.

NOTES: The Data Model has been updated to include a flag "is_stem", 
to indicate that a course is considered STEM by the user at
their institution. Be sure you've sourced grade_penalty_wg1_p1.R and grade_penalty_functions.R,
both of which live in the analysis folder (see DEPENDENCIES below).

INPUTS:
see https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1SzU4PcIEUsAGnKKyAcugHO2O2aZW29sf9a_cC-FAElk/edit#gid=1679989021
sr, sc: the student course and student record tables
crse_termcd_limit: The lower limit for TERM_CD of the cohort to include. 
                   It includes this term and all those after.
top10: set this to true to let the code try to identify and run on your top 10 courses by 
       enrollment of these students. WARNING: for reasons unknown the
       join required is super slow. 
       
OUTPUTS: Because it makes direct use of grade_penalty_wg1_p1.R below, outputs are exactly the same and 
         and can be written locally (write_tsv or write_csv) and shared.
         
DEPENDENCIES: Must have tidyverse installed, must source the following:
              > source(str_c(<PATH_TO_YOUR_CODE>,'/grade_penalty_functions.R'))
              > source(str_c(<PATH_TO_YOUR_CODE>,'/grade_penalty_wg1_p1.R'))
EXAMPLE: 
> kk <- create_all_stem_layer(sr,sc)
> print(kk[[1]])
> print(kk[[2]])
> print(kk[[3]])
       
```

### Grade Outcomes for a single course
### Run the Grade Penalties Script (19-Apr-2020)
```
analysis/grade_penalty_wg1_p1.R
PURPOSE: Consider one course at a time, one term. This returns various demographic
         breakdowns and returns plots that show differences in outcomes for single
         demographic variables: ethnicity, gender, lowinc, and first gen.
INPUT: see https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1SzU4PcIEUsAGnKKyAcugHO2O2aZW29sf9a_cC-FAElk/edit#gid=1679989021
       sc - table of COURSE LEVEL VARIABLES 
       sr - table of STUDENT LEVEL VARIABLES 
       COURSE - the crs_name for the course to be studied
       TERM   - the crs_term for the course
       aggregate_terms - set to TRUE if you want to disregard term and aggregate over all.
OUTPUT: 1) This prints four plots the plot device (usually the plot view in RStudio)
        2) This returns a list, a variable containing 3 tables
        element 1: demographic statistics for the course by ethnicity, gender, LI, FG.
        element 2: grade penalty statistics by the Molinaro classification
        element 3: grade penalty statistics by the Fiorini classification
DEPENDENCIES: Must have tidyverse installed, must source the 'grade_penalty_functions.R'
              > source(str_c(<PATH_TO_YOUR_CODE>,'/grade_penalty_functions.R'))

EXAMPLE:
> kk <- grade_penalty_wg1_p1(sr,sc,COURSE='PHYSICS 140',TERM='FA 2012')
> print(kk[[1]])
> print(kk[[2]])
> print(kk[[3]])
```
